README.md, before:

# Homework assignments for Wits COMS2001 course #

## Submitting homework assignments in COMS2001 ##

To be able to submit your assignments, you need to go through the
following steps:

1. If you don't have a GitHub account, create one.

2. Register your GitHub username with this course by filling out [this
form](http://goo.gl/GB61cF).  This is due on Friday, 15 July -- **you
will not be able to submit any assignments if this is not done**.

3. Before you can fetch/pull repositories from or push repositories to
GitHub from a local machine on Wits campus, you will have to set up
`git` to by-pass the university proxy server.  To do that, execute the
following commands, replacing 'student_number' and 'password' with your details:  
```
git config --global https.proxy "http://students\student_number:password@proxyss.wits.ac.za:80"  
git config --global http.proxy "http://students\student_number:password@proxyss.wits.ac.za:80"
```

4. You are now ready to work on your first assignment, access hw0 in this repository.

## `git` and GitHub

To be able effectively work on your assignments and submit them, you
need to learn to use both `git` and GitHub.

`git` is a version control tool that helps you to keep track of
different versions of your files and synchronize them across different
machines. [GitHub](https://github.com) is a hosting service for git
repositories with a convenient web interface.

It is worth your while to invest time and effort in learning how to
use git and GitHub effectively -- you will be using them throughout
this course, and possibly for a very long time afterwards. A good
place to start learning about them is
[this](http://git-scm.com/book/en/v2) book. Additional resources are
suggested at the [course's
web-page](http://www.cs.wits.ac.za/~dmitry/coms2001/).  GitHub's help
page also contains numerous links to resources for learning about both
`git` and GitHub.

## Creating and registering your GitHub account

If you don't yet have a GitHub account, create one by following the
instructions [here](https://help.github.com/articles/set-up-git/).

Once you have an account, register it with this course by filling out
[this form](http://goo.gl/GB61cF).  After you've registered your
account, you will receive an email message with a link to your
personal GitHub repository for this course; this email will be sent to
the email address associated with your GitHub account.

## Submitting assignments in COMS2001

All assignments will be submitted by pushing to your private
repository associated with this course.

For the duration of the course, you will have access to two
homework-related repositories in the `WITS-2001` GitHub organization:

1. [A homework repository](https://github.com/WITS-COMS2001/hw)
containing public information about the homework assignments. You only
have the read access to this repository.  All the assignments and
updates will be posted here. You should regularly check the course's
web-site and Wit-e for announcements related to homework assignments.

2. A personal repository whose name will coincide with your student
number.  This repository is private to you -- only you and the course
staff can read from this repository: you should keep the contents of
this repository private and secure.  You will be using this repository
to submit your assignments. We will create this for you once you have submitted your details to us through [this form](http://goo.gl/GB61cF).

Each assignment will reside in a separate top-level directory. Each
assignment has a `README.md` containing instructions as well as the
files you are going to need to complete the assignment. Right now, you
are reading a `README.md` for hw.

At the start of the course, your personal repository will be empty.

## Suggested workflow

In this section, we are going to suggest a workflow for completing
your assignments; if you find an alternative workflow more convenient,
you are welcome to use it.

We suggest that you create a repository on your local machine and link
it up with both of your remote repositories for this course; you might
want to tag the public repository containing the assignments as
"course" and your private repository as "origin". Assuming you have
adopted this naming convention, before starting work on your
assignment, you will pull (or fetch and merge) from `course` into your
local repository, and once you've completed your work, you will push
it to `origin`. To make pulling from `course` easier, you might want
to set up a branch in your local repository that tracks
`course/master`.

Working out the details of how the tasks described in the preceding
paragraph are done is left to you as part your first assignment. Your
are welcome to seek help on this both from your fellow students and
from the course staff.

## Good luck with all your assignments! ##

Commit message:

Added workaround for special characters in proxy password.

README.md, after:

# Homework assignments for Wits COMS2001 course #

## Submitting homework assignments in COMS2001 ##

To be able to submit your assignments, you need to go through the
following steps:

1. If you don't have a GitHub account, create one.

2. Register your GitHub username with this course by filling out [this
form](http://goo.gl/GB61cF).  This is due on Friday, 15 July -- **you
will not be able to submit any assignments if this is not done**.

3. Before you can fetch/pull repositories from or push repositories to
GitHub from a local machine on Wits campus, you will have to set up
`git` to by-pass the university proxy server.  To do that, execute the
following commands, replacing 'student_number' and 'password' with your details:  
```
git config --global https.proxy "http://students\student_number:password@proxyss.wits.ac.za:80"  
git config --global http.proxy "http://students\student_number:password@proxyss.wits.ac.za:80"
```  
NOTE: If you still get 407 errors, check whether you have special characters (@,:,!,#,$) in your password and substitue them accordingly. Simply escaping them with '\' does not work, see <a href="http://www.cyberciti.biz/faq/unix-linux-export-variable-http_proxy-with-special-characters/">this link</a> for more details.

4. You are now ready to work on your first assignment, access hw0 in this repository.

## `git` and GitHub

To be able effectively work on your assignments and submit them, you
need to learn to use both `git` and GitHub.

`git` is a version control tool that helps you to keep track of
different versions of your files and synchronize them across different
machines. [GitHub](https://github.com) is a hosting service for git
repositories with a convenient web interface.

It is worth your while to invest time and effort in learning how to
use git and GitHub effectively -- you will be using them throughout
this course, and possibly for a very long time afterwards. A good
place to start learning about them is
[this](http://git-scm.com/book/en/v2) book. Additional resources are
suggested at the [course's
web-page](http://www.cs.wits.ac.za/~dmitry/coms2001/).  GitHub's help
page also contains numerous links to resources for learning about both
`git` and GitHub.

## Creating and registering your GitHub account

If you don't yet have a GitHub account, create one by following the
instructions [here](https://help.github.com/articles/set-up-git/).

Once you have an account, register it with this course by filling out
[this form](http://goo.gl/GB61cF).  After you've registered your
account, you will receive an email message with a link to your
personal GitHub repository for this course; this email will be sent to
the email address associated with your GitHub account.

## Submitting assignments in COMS2001

All assignments will be submitted by pushing to your private
repository associated with this course.

For the duration of the course, you will have access to two
homework-related repositories in the `WITS-2001` GitHub organization:

1. [A homework repository](https://github.com/WITS-COMS2001/hw)
containing public information about the homework assignments. You only
have the read access to this repository.  All the assignments and
updates will be posted here. You should regularly check the course's
web-site and Wit-e for announcements related to homework assignments.

2. A personal repository whose name will coincide with your student
number.  This repository is private to you -- only you and the course
staff can read from this repository: you should keep the contents of
this repository private and secure.  You will be using this repository
to submit your assignments. We will create this for you once you have submitted your details to us through [this form](http://goo.gl/GB61cF).

Each assignment will reside in a separate top-level directory. Each
assignment has a `README.md` containing instructions as well as the
files you are going to need to complete the assignment. Right now, you
are reading a `README.md` for hw.

At the start of the course, your personal repository will be empty.

## Suggested workflow

In this section, we are going to suggest a workflow for completing
your assignments; if you find an alternative workflow more convenient,
you are welcome to use it.

We suggest that you create a repository on your local machine and link
it up with both of your remote repositories for this course; you might
want to tag the public repository containing the assignments as
"course" and your private repository as "origin". Assuming you have
adopted this naming convention, before starting work on your
assignment, you will pull (or fetch and merge) from `course` into your
local repository, and once you've completed your work, you will push
it to `origin`. To make pulling from `course` easier, you might want
to set up a branch in your local repository that tracks
`course/master`.

Working out the details of how the tasks described in the preceding
paragraph are done is left to you as part your first assignment. Your
are welcome to seek help on this both from your fellow students and
from the course staff.

## Good luck with all your assignments! ##
